docs: EXPOSED-756 Add documentation for SQL migration options (#2471)
JetBrains/Exposed: documentation-website/Writerside/topics/Migrations.md

explicitly dropped.

The [`MigrationUtils.dropUnmappedColumnsStatements()`](https://jetbrains.github.io/Exposed/api/exposed-migration/[root]/-migration-utils/drop-unmapped-columns-statements.html)
function helps identify columns that are no longer present in your current table definitions and returns the SQL statements to remove them:

```Kotlin
```
{src="exposed-migrations/src/main/kotlin/org/example/App.kt" include-symbol="dropStatements"}

## Logging

By default, each method provided by `MigrationUtils` logs descriptions and the execution time of each intermediate step. These logs are emitted at the `INFO` 
level and can be disabled by setting `withLogs` to `false`:

```Kotlin
```
{src="exposed-migrations/src/main/kotlin/org/example/App.kt" include-lines="57-60"}

## Limitations

While Exposed’s migration tools are powerful, there are some limitations:

- You must still implement and manage your own migration flow.
- No automatic migration application is provided — scripts must be executed manually or integrated into your deployment process.

> - Some database-specific behaviors, such as SQLite’s limited `ALTER TABLE` support, may lead to partial or failed migrations if not reviewed.

Reviewer: I'd suggest taking the note from previous section and putting here, as its own subsection or a more detailed point.
Same thought for the PostgreSQL bit.

Since we've given a concrete example, for PostgreSQL, we could also do it for SQLite.
The most common issue we've had is this (adding a column without `default()`):
SQLite very clearly states that it [does not allow `ALTER TABLE ADD COLUMN`](https://www.sqlite.org/lang_altertable.html#alter_table_add_column) in very specific conditions, like adding a new column without a default value. Exposed cannot account for every one of these conditions, so it will generate the expected SQL statement anyway & defer to the user to either review (or not attempt such a migration in the first place). But of course the statement will fail if the user tries to execute it.

    </p>
</tldr>

Managing database schema changes is a critical part of application development. Exposed offers several tools to assist with schema migrations, allowing you to
evolve your database alongside your codebase.

While Exposed provides basic migration support through [`SchemaUtils`](https://jetbrains.github.io/Exposed/api/exposed-core/org.jetbrains.exposed.sql/-schema-utils/index.html),
the [`MigrationUtils`](https://jetbrains.github.io/Exposed/api/exposed-migration/[root]/-migration-utils/index.html) methods from the `exposed-migration` package
provide a more structured and production-ready way to manage schema changes. They allow you to [inspect differences](#aligning-the-database-schema) between the current
database state and your defined table schema, and to generate or apply migration scripts accordingly.

## Adding dependencies

To use the methods provided by `MigrationUtils`, include the `exposed-migration` artifact in your build script:

```Kotlin
implementation("org.jetbrains.exposed:exposed-migration:%exposed_version%")
```

## Aligning the database schema

> When you need to bring your database schema in line with your current Exposed table definitions, you have two options:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you need to bring your database schema in line with your current Exposed table definitions, you have three options:
```

function:

```Kotlin
```
{src="exposed-migrations/src/main/kotlin/org/example/App.kt" include-symbol="statements"}

The returned collection of string SQL statements may include `CREATE`, `ALTER`, and `DROP` operations—including potentially destructive actions like `DROP COLUMN`
or `DELETE`, so review them carefully before choosing to execute them.

> For database-specific constraints, see the [limitations](#limitations) section.

### Generate a migration script

To generate a migration script based on schema differences between your database and the current Exposed model, use the
[`MigrationUtils.generateMigrationScript()`](https://jetbrains.github.io/Exposed/api/exposed-migration/[root]/-migration-utils/generate-migration-script.html)
function:

```Kotlin
```
{src="exposed-migrations/src/main/kotlin/org/example/GenerateMigrationScript.kt" include-lines="35-39"}

This method allows you to see what the migration script will look like before applying the migration. If a migration script with the same name already exists,
its content will be overwritten.

## Validating the database schema

> Before applying any migrations, it’s useful to validate that your Exposed schema definitions match the actual state of the database. While the primary use of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before applying any migrations, it's useful to validate that your Exposed schema definitions match the actual state of the database. While the primary use of
```

- [`currentDialect.existingPrimaryKeys()`](https://jetbrains.github.io/Exposed/api/exposed-core/org.jetbrains.exposed.sql.vendors/-database-dialect/existing-primary-keys.html)

## Legacy columns cleanup

As your schema evolves, it's common to remove or rename columns in your table definitions. However, old columns may still exist in the database unless
explicitly dropped.

The [`MigrationUtils.dropUnmappedColumnsStatements()`](https://jetbrains.github.io/Exposed/api/exposed-migration/[root]/-migration-utils/drop-unmapped-columns-statements.html)
function helps identify columns that are no longer present in your current table definitions and returns the SQL statements to remove them:

```Kotlin
```
{src="exposed-migrations/src/main/kotlin/org/example/App.kt" include-symbol="dropStatements"}

## Logging

By default, each method provided by `MigrationUtils` logs descriptions and the execution time of each intermediate step. These logs are emitted at the `INFO` 
level and can be disabled by setting `withLogs` to `false`:

```Kotlin
```
{src="exposed-migrations/src/main/kotlin/org/example/App.kt" include-lines="57-60"}

## Limitations

> While Exposed’s migration tools are powerful, there are some limitations:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While Exposed's migration tools are powerful, there are some limitations:
```

- You must still implement and manage your own migration flow.
- Automatic migration execution is not provided — scripts must be run manually or integrated into your deployment process. This limitation is already addressed in the 
[Gradle migration plugin feature request](#gradle-plugin).
> For an example of manual execution
> with Flyway, see the [`exposed-migrations` sample project](https://github.com/JetBrains/Exposed/tree/main/documentation-website/Writerside/snippets/exposed-migrations).

> - Some database-specific behaviors, such as SQLite’s limited `ALTER TABLE` support, may lead to partial or failed migrations if not reviewed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Some database-specific behaviors, such as SQLite's limited `ALTER TABLE` support, may lead to partial or failed migrations if not reviewed.
```

SQLite has strict limitations around the `ALTER TABLE ADD COLUMN` statement. For example, it does not allow adding a new column without a 
default value under certain conditions. Since Exposed cannot account for all of SQLite’s specific constraints, it will still generate the expected SQL statement. 
It is up to you to review the generated SQL and avoid attempting migrations that are incompatible with SQLite’s rules. If such a statement is executed, it will
fail at runtime.

> For more information on this restriction, refer to the [SQLite documentation](https://www.sqlite.org/lang_altertable.html#alter_table_add_column). 

### PostgreSQL

When running on PostgreSQL, the functions to align the database schema also check for inconsistencies between table definitions and sequences (especially those tied
to `SERIAL` columns on `IdTable`).

Sequences manually created with `CREATE SEQUENCE` and not linked to a table are ignored. No `DROP` statements are generated for such sequences.

## Feature requests

### Gradle plugin

A Gradle plugin to simplify SQL migrations is in development. A proposed design for Flyway integration has been presented and is actively being implemented. To show

> interest or get involved, see the [YouTrack issue fpr creating the migration Gradle plugin](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/EXPOSED-755/Create-a-migration-Gradle-plugin).

Reviewer: Typo: "fpr"
